doc/md: add migrate down (#2648)
ariga/atlas: doc/md/versioned/down.mdx

---
id: down
slug: /versioned/down
title: Down Migrations
---

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

The `atlas migrate down` command allows reverting applied migrations. Unlike the traditional approach, where down files

> are "pre-planned," Atlas computes a migration plan based on the database state to revert applied migrations and executes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
are "pre-planned", Atlas computes a migration plan based on the current state of the database. Atlas reverts previously applied migrations and executes
```

them until the desired version is reached, regardless of the state of the latest applied migration — whether it succeeded,
failed, or was partially applied and left the database in an unknown version.

By default, Atlas generates and executes a set of [pre-migration checks](/versioned/checks) to ensure the computed plan

> does not introduce destructive changes or delete data. Users can review the plan and run the checks before the plan is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
does not introduce destructive changes or deletes data. Users can review the plan and run the checks before the plan is
```

applied by using the `--dry-run` flag or Atlas Cloud as described below.

### Migration Approval

Users under the [Business or the Enterprise](https://atlasgo.cloud/pricing) plan can protect this flow by configuring
Atlas to require approvals from one or more reviewers before applying it to the database. Here's how you can do it:

<details>
<summary>Screenshot example</summary>

<div style={{textAlign: 'center'}}>
    <img src="https://atlasgo.io/uploads/versioned/protected-flow.png" alt="Migration Approval Policy" width="100%"/>
    <p style={{fontSize: 12}}>Migration approval policy enabled for the <code>atlas migrate down</code> command</p>
</div>
</details>

> Once set, running `atlas migrate down` will create a plan that requires approvals before it is applied:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once set, running `atlas migrate down` will create a plan that requires approval before it is applied:
```

```shell
$ atlas migrate down --env prod
//highlight-next-line-info
To approve the plan visit: https://a8m.atlasgo.cloud/deployments/51539607645
```

<Tabs>
<TabItem value="review" label="Require Approval">

![Review Required](https://atlasgo.io/uploads/versioned/require-approval.png)

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="applied" label="Approved and Applied">

![Review Required](https://atlasgo.io/uploads/versioned/down-applied.png)

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

### Dry Run

> The `dry-run` option allows viewing the SQL statements planned to downgrade the database to its desired version.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `dry-run` option allows viewing the SQL statements planned to downgrade the database to its desired version, without executing them.
```

> If the down migration plan contains [pre-migration checks](/versioned/checks), Atlas executes them on the database and report the results.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the down migration plan contains [pre-migration checks](/versioned/checks), Atlas execute the checks on the database and reports the results.
```

```shell
atlas migrate down \
  --url "mysql://root:pass@localhost:3306/example" \
  --dir "file://migrations" \
  --dry-run
```

:::info Dry Run Cloud Reports

Users who have connected or pushed their migration directory to the [Atlas Schema Registry](/cloud/features/registry) can
review the dry-run reports and the pre-migration checks results on their Atlas dashboard.

<details>
<summary>Screenshot example</summary>

<div style={{textAlign: 'center'}}>
    <img src="https://atlasgo.io/uploads/versioned/down-dry-run.png" alt="Migrate Down Dry Run" width="100%"/>
    <p style={{fontSize: 12}}>Dry-run down migration in Atlas Cloud</p>
</div>
</details>

:::

### Revert local databases

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

When experimenting with generating and applying migrations locally, sometimes there is a need to revert the last applied

> migration(s), typically the last one applied. The following steps demonstrate how to revert the last applied migration,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
migration or migrations. The following steps demonstrate how to revert the last applied migration,
```

  --dev-url "docker://postgres/15/dev?search_path=public"
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="sqlite" label="SQLite">

```shell
atlas migrate down \
  --dir "file://migrations" \
  --url "sqlite://file.db" \
  --dev-url "sqlite://dev?mode=memory"
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="sqlserver" label="SQL Server">

```shell
atlas migrate down \
  --dir "file://migrations" \
  --url "sqlserver://sa:P@ssw0rd0995@:1433?database=master" \
  --dev-url "docker://sqlserver/2022-latest/dev"
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="clickhouse" label="ClickHouse">

```shell
atlas migrate down \
  --dir "file://migrations" \
  --url "clickhouse://root:pass@:9000/default" \
  --dev-url "docker://clickhouse/23.11/dev"
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

3\. After downgrading your database to the desired version, you can safely delete the migration file `20240305171146.sql`
from the migration directory and then run `atlas migrate hash` to update the `atlas.sum` file.

4\. After the file was deleted and the database downgraded, you can generate a new migration using the `atlas migrate diff`
    command with the optional `--edit` flag to open the generated file in your default editor.

:::note Cleaning the database

> `atlas migrate down` reverts only changes applied by the migration directory, and do not touch resources such as tables that

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`atlas migrate down` reverts only changes applied by the migration directory, and does not touch resources that
```

> `atlas migrate down` reverts only changes applied by the migration directory, and do not touch resources such as tables that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`atlas migrate down` only reverts changes applied by the migration directory, and does not touch resources such as tables that
```

> exist in the schema, but not managed by migration directory. If you need to clean the entire database or a schema to its initial

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
exist in the schema, but are not managed by migration directory. If you need to clean the entire database or a schema to its initial
```

state, including the `atlas_schema_revisions` table, consider using the `atlas schema clean` command:

<Tabs defaultValue="mysql">
<TabItem value="mysql" label="MySQL">

```shell
atlas schema clean -u "mysql://root:pass@:3306/example"
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="maria" label="MariaDB">

```shell
atlas schema clean -u "maria://root:pass@localhost:3306/example"
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="postgres" label="PostgreSQL">

```shell
atlas schema clean -u "postgres://postgres:pass@localhost:5432/database?search_path=public&sslmode=disable"
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="sqlite" label="SQLite">

```shell
atlas schema clean -u "sqlite://file.db"
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="sqlserver" label="SQL Server">

```shell
atlas schema clean -u "sqlserver://sa:pass@remote:1433?database=master"
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="clickhouse" label="ClickHouse">

```shell
atlas schema clean -u "clickhouse://user:pass@remote:9000/database"
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

:::

### Revert real environments

Atlas follows a linear migration history model, in which schema changes are "roll-forward" by default rather than rolled back.

> In practice, that means reverting a schema change, such as table or column addition, require generating a new migration version

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In practice, that means reverting a schema change, such as table or column addition, requires generating a new migration version
```

> that undo the changes, due to the fact that the "up" and "down" might not occur consecutively as the schema evolves over time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to undo the changes. This is due to the fact that the "up" and "down" might not occur consecutively as the schema evolves over time.
```

However, there are cases that reverting the last applied migration(s) is necessary, such when experimenting on a staging environment

> or when the entire deployment is rolled-back and the schema changes introduced in the new version are not backward compatible for old

Reviewer: ```suggestion
or when the entire deployment is rolled back and the schema changes introduced in the new version are not backward compatible for old
```

versions of the application and therefore need to be reverted. To undo applied migration(s) on real environments, there are two approaches:

#### Using the Schema Registry

If the project is connected to the [Atlas Schema Registry](/cloud/features/registry), you can simply revert to a specific

> version or a tag (e.g., GitHub commit)  using the [GitHub Atlas Action](https://github.com/ariga/atlas-action?tab=readme-ov-file#arigaatlas-actionmigratedown)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
version or a tag (e.g., GitHub commit) using the [Atlas GitHub Action](https://github.com/ariga/atlas-action?tab=readme-ov-file#arigaatlas-actionmigratedown)
```

or with the following commands:

```hcl title="atlas.hcl"
env {

>   name = atlas.env # Dynamically set.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  name = atlas.env # dynamically set
```

  migration {
    dir = "atlas://project"
  }
}
```

<Tabs defaultValue="mysql">
<TabItem value="mysql" label="MySQL">

```shell
atlas migrate down \

>   --to-tag "$COMMIT" \

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  --to-tag "$COMMIT_SHA" \
```
I think this makes it more clear.

  --url "$DATABASE_URL" \
  --dev-url "docker://mysql/8/dev" \
  --env "staging"
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="maria" label="MariaDB">

```shell
atlas migrate down \
  --to-tag "$COMMIT" \
  --url "$DATABASE_URL" \
  --dev-url "docker://mariadb/latest/dev" \
  --env "staging"
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="postgres" label="PostgreSQL">

```shell
atlas migrate down \
  --to-tag "$COMMIT" \
  --url "$DATABASE_URL" \
  --dev-url "docker://postgres/15/dev?search_path=public" \
  --env "staging"
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="sqlite" label="SQLite">

```shell
atlas migrate down \
  --to-tag "$COMMIT" \
  --url "$DATABASE_URL" \
  --dev-url "sqlite://dev?mode=memory" \
  --env "staging"
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="sqlserver" label="SQL Server">

```shell
atlas migrate down \
  --to-tag "$COMMIT" \
  --url "$DATABASE_URL" \
  --dev-url "docker://sqlserver/2022-latest/dev" \
  --env "staging"
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="clickhouse" label="ClickHouse">

```shell
atlas migrate down \
  --to-tag "$COMMIT" \
  --url "clickhouse://root:pass@:9000/default" \
  --dev-url "docker://clickhouse/23.11/dev"
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

> If this command [requires a review](#migration-approval), a new plan will be created and Atlas waits for approval before executing it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If this command [requires a review](#migration-approval), a new plan will be created and Atlas will wait for approval before executing it.
```

- **Down** - A down migration is when changes were applied to the database and need to be reverted. Atlas computes the
  necessary changes to downgrade the database to the desired version and executes them.
  :::note Transactional DDLs
  Note, some databases like MySQL do not support [transactional DDLs](/versioned/troubleshoot#a-word-on-transactions),
  causing the database to stay in unclear state in case the migration failed in the middle of the execution. In such cases,
  "rolling back" the partially applied migrations requires reverting the applied statements, which is what `atlas migrate down` does.

  In addition, since non-transactional DDLs can cause the database to stay in a stale state in case they fail in the middle
  of the execution, when Atlas generates a down migration plan, it takes the database (+ its version) and the necessary changes
  into account. If a transactional plan, executable as a single unit, can be created, Atlas will opt for this approach.
  If not, Atlas reverts each applied statement one at a time, ensuring the database is not left in an unknown state in case a
  failure occurs midway, for any reason.
  :::

### Flags and Arguments

> The default behavior of `atlas migrate down` is that it reverts the last applied file. However, you can pass the amount

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The default behavior of `atlas migrate down` is to revert the last applied file. However, you can pass the amount
```

> The default behavior of `atlas migrate down` is that it reverts the last applied file. However, you can pass the amount
> of migrations to revert as an argument. For instance, `atlas migrate down 2` will revert up to 2 pending migrations.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The default behavior of `atlas migrate down` is that it reverts the last applied file. However, you can pass the amount
of migrations to revert as an argument, or the target version or tag as a flag. For instance, `atlas migrate down 2` will revert up to 2 pending migrations while `atlas migrate down --to-version 1234` will revert all applied migrations after version "1234".
```
